An Approach to
Extended
Memorization
of Scripture
Dr. Andrew Davis
An Approach to
Extended Memorization
of Scripture
INDEX
1. Scripture memoriza
Ɵon commanded and encouraged
2. Bene
fits of Scripture memoriza
Ɵon
3. Overcoming excuses for not memorizing
4. Advantages of memorizing books of the Bible as opposed to
individual verses
5. Making the commitment before God
6. Choosing your
first book
7. Surveying the terrain
8. Daily procedures
a) retaining old verses
b) learning new verses
9. Weeding the garden
10. Long‐term reten
Ɵon and/or moving on to other books
11. Memorizing long books or memorizing faster
SCRIPTURE MEMORIZATION
COMMANDED
Welcome to the rich and challenging journey of extended memoriza
Ɵon
of Scripture! You are about to embark on one of the most searching and
rewarding exercises of spiritual and mental labor anyone could ever
aƩempt: the memorizing of whole chapters and books of the Bible. This
effort will challenge you to the depths of your being. Not simply because memorizing is hard work (it is), but because the verses themselves
will search your souls with the light of God’s perfect Word. Some days
memorizing are harder than others, and it gets harder as you get older
and busier. But the rewards of knowledge of God’s Word and of growing in
Ɵmacy with Christ will make all your labor in the face of these challenges worthwhile.
As you face the challenges of extended memoriza
Ɵon, it is good to know
whether God is commanding you to do this. Scripture is very clear that
God does not want us to innovate when it comes to pleasing Him: He
wants simple obedience. “To obey is be
Ʃer than sacrifice.” (1 Samuel
15:22) Jesus said “If you love me, you will obey what I command.” (John 14:15) Now the incredible beauty of the Chris
Ɵan life is
that we learn that the Lord will enable us to keep all His commands by
the power of the Holy Spirit. Ezekiel 36:27 promises that God will put
His Spirit in us and move us to follow His commands and be careful to
keep His laws. If this is so, the amazing power of the New Covenant in
Christ is that God’s commands become promises of what He will do in
our lives by His Spirit.
So, has God commanded us to memorize Scripture? Yes, I believe He
has in many places, and that Scripture encourages memoriza
Ɵon in other places. Let’s look at some key passages.
In John 15, Jesus likens Himself to a vine and believers as branches that
must abide (or live, dwell, remain) in Him in order to stay alive and be
frui
ƞul. In John 15:7-8, Jesus gets even more specific, saying that if we
remain in Him and His words (plural!) remain/live/dwell/abide in us,
then we may ask whatever we wish and it will be given to us.
John 15:7‐8 If you remain in me and my words remain in you,
ask whatever you wish, and it will be given you. This is
to my Father's glory, that you bear much fruit, showing
yourselves to be my disciples. 
This is the essence of the fruiƞulness by which we will both glorify God
and prove that we are Jesus’ disciples. But what does it mean to have
Jesus’ “words” (plural!) remaining/living/dwelling/abiding in us? It
means at least that we can remember them. More than that, it means
that they are capƟvaƟng our minds and hearts, mulƟplying and spreading like yeast within us, dominaƟng our heart more and more. It is hard
for me to see how this can be done as fully as Jesus intends apart from
memorizaƟon.
Similar to this passage is Paul’s commandment to the Colossians:
Colossians 3:16 Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly as you
teach and admonish one another with all wisdom, and
as you sing psalms, hymns and spiritual songs with
graƟtude in your hearts to God.
How can we obey this commandment fully apart from memorizaƟon?
By saturaƟng our minds with the Word of God, and by conƟnually keeping it in front of us, we may obey Paul’s words here.
Along with these verses come some from the Old Testament which
speak of God’s people meditaƟng on God’s Word “day and night.” Before the invenƟon of the moveable type prinƟng press by Gutenburg in
1439, Bibles were copied by hand and extremely expensive. Only a
small percentage of God’s people would have had their own copies of
God’s Word. So to meditate “day and night” on a passage meant to
have memorized it:
Psalm 1:1‐3 Blessed is the man who does not walk in the coun‐
sel of the wicked or stand in the way of sinners or sit in
the seat of mockers. But his delight is in the law of the
LORD, and on his law he meditates day and night. He is
like a tree planted by streams of water, which yields its
fruit in season and whose leaf does not wither. Whatev‐
er he does prospers.
Joshua 1:8 Do not let this Book of the Law depart from your
mouth; meditate on it day and night, so that you may be
careful to do everything wriƩen in it. Then you will be
prosperous and successful. 
Psalm 119:97 Oh, how I love your law! I meditate on it all day
long.
Psalm 119:148 My eyes stay open through the watches of the
night, that I may meditate on your promises.
It is the same for us today, even in our blessed age in which the Word of
God is so readily accessible to so many of God’s people. Medita
Ɵng on
Scripture con
Ɵnually (“day and night” or “all day long”) is very di
fficult
without memoriza
Ɵon.
Some passages in Proverbs speak of storing up God’s commands within
us:
Proverbs 2:1‐6 My son, if you accept my words and store up my
commands within you, turning your ear to wisdom and
applying your heart to understanding, and if you call
out for insight and cry aloud for understanding, and if
you look for it as for silver and search for it as for hidden
treasure, then you will understand the fear of the LORD
and
find the knowledge of God. For the LORD gives wis‐
dom, and from his mouth come knowledge and under‐
standing.
Proverbs 7:1‐3 My son, keep my words and store up my com‐
mands within you. Keep my commands and you will live;
guard my teachings as the apple of your eye. Bind them
on your
fingers; write them on the tablet of your heart.
If you read these two passages carefully, they seem to lead directly to
the discipline of memoriza
Ɵon. What does it mean to “store up God’s
commands within you” apart from memorizing them? The second passage speaks of wri
Ɵng the teachings of God on the “tablet of your
heart.” That seems like memoriza
Ɵon to me!
Perhaps one of the best known verses on memoriza
Ɵon comes from
Psalm 119, that marvelous and complex poem of praise for the perfecƟon of God’s Holy Word. In verse 9, we have a clear recommenda
Ɵon of
memoriza
Ɵon, coupled with a powerful mo
Ɵve—personal holiness: 
Psalm 119:11 I have hidden your word in my heart that I might
not sin against you.
So also Deuteronomy 6 commands Jewish fathers to have God’s word
“upon their hearts” and to “sharpen them” (the literal Hebrew word
translated, “impress”):
Deuteronomy 6:6‐7 These commandments that I give you today
are to be upon your hearts. Impress (lit. “sharpen”)
them on your children. Talk about them when you sit at
home and when you walk along the road, when you lie
down and when you get up.
If you read these vital words carefully, the strong sense of memoriza
Ɵon
will come clearly to the fore. What does it mean to have these commandments (plural!) “upon our hearts”? I am not saying that memoriza
Ɵon is su
fficient to fulfill this, but it may well be necessary—or at least
helpful! And how can you talk about the commands of God so con
Ɵnually with your children while walking along the road if you can’t recite
their content? The word “impress” (“sharpen”) implies a con
Ɵnually
repeated hearing of God’s commands… it’s going on all the
Ɵme. Again,
that points to memoriza
Ɵon.
Finally, consider the words of James 1:
James 1:22‐25 Do not merely listen to the word, and so deceive
yourselves. Do what it says. Anyone who listens to the
word but does not do what it says is like a man who
looks at his face in a mirror and, aŌer looking at himself,
goes away and immediately forgets what he looks like.
But the man who looks intently into the perfect law that
gives freedom, and con
Ɵnues to do this, not forge
ƫng
what he has heard, but doing it‐‐ he will be blessed in
what he does.
What could be clearer than this? If we do not forget the Word of God
aŌer we’ve read it but rather con
Ɵnually gazing into its truth, what does
it mean but to remember it? And another word for con
Ɵnually remembering the Word is memorizing it. 
THE BENEFITS OF SCRIPTURE
MEMORIZATION

There are numerous spiritual benefits to the memoriza
Ɵon of Scripture. A
proper assessment of these benefits begins with understanding the role of
the wri
Ʃen word of God in our spiritual development. Jesus Christ openly
stated that our spiritual existence depends upon the word of God: “Man
does not live on bread alone, but on every word that comes from the mouth
of God.” (Ma
Ʃhew 4:4) The words of God are wri
Ʃen in only one place: the
Bible. Also, according to the Apostle Peter one of our ongoing responsibiliƟes is to “grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ,” (2 Peter
3:18) and that we are to “make every e
ffort to add to our faith goodness, and
to goodness knowledge…” (2 Peter 1:5). But how are we to grow? Growth in
the Lord is called “sanc
Ɵfica
Ɵon,” the process by which we become more and
more like Jesus Christ and more and more separated from the world. Jesus
Christ says that happens by the Word of God: “Sanc
Ɵfy them by the truth;
your word is truth.” (John 17:17) However, the Word of God must enter us
through our MIND—through our understanding—in order to change our
hearts. Thus we are to meditate deeply on Scripture in order to understand
it be
Ʃer, so that our hearts may be changed. And we are to meditate on
“every word that comes from the mouth of God.” There is no more useful
discipline to this careful process of verse by verse medita
Ɵon than memorizaƟon. Memoriza
Ɵon is not the same as medita
Ɵon, but it is almost impossible
for someone to memorize a passage of Scripture without somewhat deepening his/her understanding of those verses. Plus, once the passage is memorized, a life
Ɵme of reflec
Ɵon is now available through ongoing review… while
driving on long trips, while walking on beaches, while conversing with
friends, memorized verses can flow from you and cause a deepening of understanding.
Furthermore, these verses also sanc
Ɵfy us by causing us to hate sin and to
determine to fight it vigorously. Through memoriza
Ɵon, we are able to stand
in the moment of tempta
Ɵon through the “sword of the Spirit, which is the
Word of God.” (Ephesians 6:17) Therefore the Psalmist says, “How can a
young man keep his way pure? By living according to your word. I have hidden your word in my heart that I might not sin against you.” (Psalm 119:9,11)
In addi
Ɵon, the word sanc
Ɵfies us by transforming our en
Ɵre worldview from
secular to heavenly: “Do not be conformed any longer to the pa
Ʃern of this
world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind. Then you will be
able to test and approve what God’s will is—his good, pleasing, and perfect
will.” (Romans 12:2) The “renewing of your minds” happens by the flow of 
Scripture through them like a pure river. As this river flows through your mind
constantly, you will see things more and more the way God does, if you are a
child of God… for “we have the mind of Christ.” (1 Corinthians 2:16) This gives
us more and more wisdom to deal with this world.
However, this benefit does not merely bless US in our own growth and development, but it becomes a treasure trove for the growth of the church as well. The
Scripture memorizer will be used migh
Ɵly by God to teach and encourage other
Chris
Ɵans, with an apt word from the perfect Word of God: “Let the word of
Christ dwell in you richly as you teach and admonish one another with all wisdom…” (Colossians 3:16) How be
Ʃer can you obey Colossians 3:16 than by
Scripture memoriza
Ɵon? The “word of Christ” will indeed “dwell in you richly”
as you memorize it, and then work it over in your mind through medita
Ɵon.
Then you will most certainly be useful to God to “teach and admonish” another
brother or sister. Scripture builds the Church to its final doctrinal and prac
Ɵcal
maturity (Ephesians 4:13-16), and God uses those who memorize it to do this
building in a powerful and eternally frui
ƞul way.
Finally, the memoriza
Ɵon of Scripture enables us to bless lost people with a
powerful and vivid presenta
Ɵon of the gospel of salva
Ɵon. “Faith comes from
hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word of
Christ.” (Romans 10:17) Those who memorize Scripture obey Peter’s command
in this regard: “Always be prepared to give an answer to everyone who asks
you to give a reason for the hope that you have.” (1 Peter 3:15) The
“prepara
Ɵon” Peter had in mind is powerfully done by memorizing Scripture.
Remember that it is Scripture which is “able to make you wise for salva
Ɵon
through faith in Christ Jesus.” (2 Timothy 3:15) The evangelist who stores up
Scripture on the life of Christ, for example, can vividly retell the miracle stories
to a genera
Ɵon which is biblically illiterate, which knows very li
Ʃle about the
life of Christ. That person can also give the theology of salva
Ɵon from Paul’s
epistles, if they have memorized those books. In short, Scripture memoriza
Ɵon
makes one a much more powerful and e
ffec
Ɵve evangelist.
There are other benefits: comfort during trials and bereavement, power and
wisdom for counseling, the development of heavenly-mindedness, the manifesta
Ɵon of the fruit of the Spirit, convic
Ɵon over indwelling sin, frui
ƞul passage of
Ɵme while wai
Ɵng for delayed plane flights, etc. Su
ffice it to say that this is well
worth our
Ɵme.
When Judgment Day comes, we will regret the waste of a single moment not
used for the glory of Christ. We will, however, not regret one moment we
spent diligently studying God’s Word and hiding it in our heart. We will only
wish we’d spent more
Ɵme doing this. 
OVERCOMING EXCUSES
FOR NOT MEMORIZING

The human heart is decei
ƞul and twisted in so many ways (Jeremiah 17:9).
We can make amazing excuses against doing things that the Lord has commanded, and that would be richly beneficial to us. I want to expose and
refute very briefly a number of the more common excuses:
1) “I don’t have a good memory”
Actually, you have a much be
Ʃer memory than you think. Consider
how many song lyrics you have memorized, many of which you don’t
even like! Consider how many facts of history or literature are burned
in your mind. Consider how many phone numbers and addresses and
significant dates are wri
Ʃen permanently on your heart. You have a
su
fficiently good memory to begin memorizing Scripture. And the
more you do, the be
Ʃer your memory will become.
2) “It will take too much
Ɵme”
This is really an exposure of your priority structures. We make
Ɵme for
whatever is truly important to us. I don’t deny that memorizing books
of the Bible is very
Ɵme consuming, but it is also very rewarding.
3) “I’m too busy”
This is another version of the previous excuse. It all comes down to
your priori
Ɵes, to the value you place on the Word of God and on your
spiritual health. Admi
Ʃedly, there are some seasons of life that are
busier than others, and in those
Ɵmes, your memoriza
Ɵon may be
greatly reduced. But a se
Ʃled pa
Ʃern of your life should be to work
daily on memorizing Scripture.
4) “I’m not very interested”
Ouch! This is one of the worst excuses of all. At least the individual is
honest… but honest about what—that he/she has very li
Ʃle interest in
the Word of God?! Such an a
ƫtude might very well be exposing an
unregenerate heart. A genuine Chris
Ɵan loves the Word of God and
hungers and thirsts for it. This terrible excuse comes from a heart riddled with idols and worldliness and is in great spiritual danger.
5) “I’ve tried before and it never really worked”
Scripture memoriza
Ɵon doesn’t “work”… WE work. I know that memoriza
Ɵon is hard work, but God can give us the strength to do it by His
Spirit. Scripture memoriza
Ɵon is a discipline, and it will develop
stronger and stronger as we do it more and more. We will get “in
shape” as we do it. 
6) “I don’t see the benefit of working on it that hard”
The Word of God is lavish in its promises of blessing to all who will
trust it and follow it. Psalm 1:1-3 (quoted above) promises that, if we
meditate on God’s Word day and night, we will be blessed in whatever
we do! What could be beƩer than that? The New Testament links
that blessing directly to the person and work of Jesus Christ. By the
Scripture, we come to faith in Christ, and by the Scripture we flourish
in that faith. Nothing can make you richer (spiritually, I mean) than the
Word of God!
7) “I read the Bible every day… why do I need to memorize it?”
Obviously it is not true that we get nothing out of merely reading the
Word of God. That is obviously untrue. Even if we work very hard at
memorizaƟon, we will memorize only a small percentage of the overall
Bible. We will get value out of whatever we read from God's Word.
But I believe the value is proporƟonal to our understanding and internalizaƟon of the Word. The more deeply we meditate and absorb
those truths, the more completely we will be blessed.
8) “I don’t know what translaƟon to use”
The choice of a proper translaƟon is a weighty one, since we will be
more or less “stuck” with whatever one we invest ourselves in over
years and years. There are no perfect translaƟons, but in English,
there are many excellent ones. We are rich among all the languages
on the Earth to have so many opƟons. I would recommend you research the strengths and weaknesses of all the major translaƟons, and
make a wise choice. Then go ahead and memorize and don’t look
back. Unless, of course, the publisher of that translaƟon decides to
change it for suspect theological reasons and pull all the old copies off
the shelves and out of the cyber-world. Then you have to choose another one.
9) “I might become prideful”
The shocking news proclaimed by the Bible is that you’re already
prideful! Pride is deeply woven into the fabric of our sin nature. The
Word of God is the remedy, not the cause of pride. If you think you
will struggle with pride, then memorize some verses on pride and/or
humility. But refraining from memorizing because you might get prideful is foolish. Rather ask God to keep you humble as you learn the richness of His Word.
10) “I don’t know how to do it”
That is what this booklet is for. I pray it will help you! 
MEMORIZING BOOKS
IS BETTER THAN
MEMORIZING INDIVIDUAL VERSES

Jesus said, “Man does not live on bread alone, but on every word that
comes from the mouth of God.” (Ma
Ʃhew 4:4) Paul said “All Scripture is
God-breathed, and is useful for teaching rebuking, correc
Ɵng, and training
in righteousness…” (2 Timothy 3:16) Paul told the Ephesian elders in Acts
20:27, “I have not hesitated to proclaim to you the whole will of God.”
Memorizing individual verses tends to miss intervening verses that the individual does not feel are as significant. If we con
Ɵnue to focus only on our
“favorite” passages of Scripture, we may well miss something new that
God wants to say to the church through a neglected por
Ɵon of His Word.
God does not speak any word in vain, and there are no wasted passages of
Scripture.
This approach also aids in the proper teaching of the Word. The best mode
of teaching and preaching is expository—se
ƫng forth in good order what
God says. Preaching topically, while necessary from
Ɵme to
Ɵme, is not the
best standard mode of ministry, for the pastor/teacher will tend to say no
more than what he already has understood from those “favorite” verses.
But a teacher who goes through the en
Ɵre passage will undoubtedly open
up a new world to his hearers, exci
Ɵng them with observa
Ɵons they are
not likely to have seen before. Thus, memorizing books leads to a constant
discovery of new insights, which keeps love for the Word vibrant and thrilling.
Also, since much of Scripture is wri
Ʃen to make a ra
Ɵonal case, there is a
flow of argumenta
Ɵon that is missed if individual verses are memorized.
But memorizing en
Ɵre books verse by verse enables the person to go easily
from the “trees to the forest” and back again. This person will be able to
tell you the overall flow of the book of Gala
Ɵans, for example, as well as
how each paragraph fits into this flow, and how each verse contributes to
each paragraph. Thus, there is far less likelihood of taking verses out of
context when en
Ɵre books are memorized. But those who memorize individual verses are par
Ɵcularly prone to taking verses out of context.


 
MAKING THE COMMITMENT
BEFORE GOD

Go to the Lord in prayer and ask Him if He wants you to invest
Ɵme in
Scripture memoriza
Ɵon. Listen to Him, confident that He will guide you.
Once you have that sense from God, ask Him humbly for help from the
Holy Spirit. Ask Him to protect you from spiritual pride… God hates pride
in every form (see Isaiah 2:6-22 and Luke 18:9-14), and while knowledge of
the Bible is absolutely essen
Ɵal to spiritual maturity, yet Biblical knowledge
without love for God and neighbor “pu
ffs up” a person (1 Cor. 8:2) and is
useless to God and actually harmful to the church. God is well able to take
away your ability to memorize if you use it for your own glory. Then, humbly make the commitment before God that you will invest
Ɵme in Scripture
memoriza
Ɵon. Later, a
Ōer you choose your book to memorize, you will
have the opportunity to make a wri
Ʃen covenant before God concerning
your commitment.
CHOOSING YOUR FIRST BOOK

Once you have sensed God’s leadership and have made the commitment
before God that you will memorize a whole book of the Bible, the next step
is to choose the book. This, too, should be done with prayer and a sense of
the leadership of the Holy Spirit. Some prac
Ɵcal concerns should guide
your choice as well:
1) Not too long (or too short?): Your first book should not be too
long, lest you get discouraged in the way and give up. The greatest
obstacle to las
Ɵng achievement in this arena is lack of perseverance…
just giving up. We give up usually because the way seems too long and
we feel we lack the strength for the rest of the journey. Just as one
who someday wants to finish a marathon does not begin simply by
running 26.2 miles but must rather work up to that level, so it is also
with extended Scripture memoriza
Ɵon. You must get the discipline
deeply rooted in your daily habits and you must develop your memory
skills before you can a
Ʃempt a really long book. Start with one around
90-160 verses long. There are shorter books of the Bible, but 2 John or
3 John may not have the same impact on your life as one of the longer
epistles. However, all Scripture is God-breathed (2 Timothy 3:16), and
therefore God may call you to start with 2 John. 
2) One that sƟrs your passions: Choose a book that God has used in
the past to minister to you, and that you think would be most useful in
your personal walk with Christ and in your ministry to others. You
should also choose a book that sƟll has some mysteries to you (as all
Scripture should and does), and that you see as an adventure in learning.
AŌer you have assessed your opƟons, bring various opƟons before the Lord
in prayer and listen to His voice. Ask Him to guide you, and He will direct
your choice.
SURVEYING THE TERRAIN

The next step is to survey the enƟre book for length, and decide how quickly you feel you can memorize it. Perhaps you can start at one verse per
day, six days per week. I always recommend taking one day off per week
so you don’t get burned out, or to take up the slack for days in which you
are sick or excepƟonally busy.
The way you survey the terrain is this:
1) Count the number of verses in the enƟre book.
2) Divide that number by the number of verses you will memorize per
week. This is how many weeks the book should take you.
3) Look at a calendar and determine a tentaƟve finish date.
4) If needed, add 10% so as to not feel under tremendous pressure
unƟl you get used to this lifestyle (i.e. if you are doing Ephesians—155
verses—at the rate of 6 verses per week, it will take you 26 weeks, or
exactly 6 months; add 10% —3 weeks—for a total of 29 weeks).
5) Make a covenant before the Lord that, with his help, you will memorize this book by this date:
“Lord, having sought you in prayer, I believe that you have led me to memorize (name of the book) . I now dedicate myself to begin this task
with your help and for your glory. I commit myself to memorizing this by
 (date) .” 
Sign and date the covenant, and put it in a place where you can get to it regularly when the
Ɵmes get tough. The purpose of surveying the terrain is to
mark out a reasonable pace which will make achievement of your goal a probability. It will teach you how much you need to do every day, and when you
should finish. The survey leads to a covenant that helps you keep persevering.
DAILY PROCEDURES

Priority of reviewing old verses: Always give priority in your mind to the
retaining of old verses even over the learning of new ones. What’s the point
in going on to new ones if you don’t hold onto the old? This doesn’t mean you
should re-memorize the old ones… just that you should begin every day’s
work with review of old verses. Look on that as what you need to do to earn
the privilege of acquiring some precious new verses. (Work before play!)
RepeƟƟon over
Ɵme: Saying a verse one hundred
Ɵmes in one day is not as
helpful as saying it every day for one hundred days. The absolute key to successful Scripture memoriza
Ɵon is repeƟƟon over a long
Ɵme period. This is
how you retain old verses while learning new ones.
Memorizing the verse numbers: An important note is that it is well worth
the extra e
ffort to memorize the verse numbers as if they were part of each
verse. This will help prevent you from dropping out verses or even whole paragraphs when you’re reci
Ɵng the book all the way through. It will also help
you in being able to pick individual verses out to quote to someone for ministry or evangelis
Ɵc purposes. Finally, it will help you to be able to recall the
verses as you are reading Chris
Ɵan books that cite them… you won’t have to
look them up. Ephesians 1:1-3’s verse numbers would be said like this: “One‐
one. Paul, an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God, to the saints in Ephesus, the faithful in Christ Jesus; One‐two Grace and peace to you from God
our Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. One‐three Praise be to the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ…” etc. Longer verse numbers are no di
fferent…
Ephesians 6:11 would be “Six‐eleven. Put on the full armor of God so that you
can take your stand against the devil’s schemes.” Acts 27:25-26 would be
“Twenty‐seven twenty‐five. So keep up your courage, men, for I have faith in
God that it will happen just as he told me. Twenty‐seven twenty‐six., Nevertheless, we must run aground on some island.” Don’t short-cut this discipline.
It actually makes memoriza
Ɵon easier in the long run.
Photographing the verses with your eyes: Memoriza
Ɵon is partly visual.
This is not to say that blind people can’t memorize the Bible, but just that the
memoriza
Ɵon process is connected very closely to the eye. Read each new 
verse ten Ɵmes, covering each words as though photographing it with your
eyes. I can sƟll remember where some parƟcular verses were on the page
of the Bible I first used to memorize them. Burn each verse into your brain
with your eyes.
Say it out loud: Another help in memorizing is to say the verse out loud
to yourself. The addiƟonal sensory input to your brain helps the memorizaƟon process. It doesn’t have to be very loud, just loud enough so you can
hear it. Also, try puƫng some feeling and interpretaƟon into reciƟng the
verses… this is actually a form of meditaƟon on the verses as you are learning them.
Sample daily procedure: The following is an example of how someone
could go about memorizing Ephesians at the rate of one verse per day:
1) Day one: Read Ephesians 1:1 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each
word as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the
verse number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. You’re
done for the day.
2) Day two: Yesterday’s verse first. Recite yesterday’s verse, Ephesians 1:1 ten Ɵmes, being sure to include the verse number. Look in
the Bible if you need to, just to refresh your memory. Now, do your
new verse. Read Ephesians 1:2 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each
word as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the
verse number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. You’re
done for the day.
3) Day three: Yesterday’s verse first. Recite yesterday’s verse, Ephesians 1:2 ten Ɵmes, being sure to include the verse number. Again,
you should look in the Bible if you need to, just to refresh your
memory. Old verses next, altogether: Recite Ephesians 1:1-2 together
once, being sure to include the verse numbers. Now, do your new
verse. Read Ephesians 1:3 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word
as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse
number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. You’re done for
the day.
4) Day four: Yesterday’s verse first. Recite yesterday’s verse, Ephesians 1:3 ten Ɵmes, being sure to include the verse number. Again,
you should look in the Bible if you need to, just to refresh your
memory. Old verses next, altogether: Recite Ephesians 1:1-3 together
once, being sure to include the verse numbers. Now, do your new 
verse. Read Ephesians 1:4 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word
as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse
number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. You’re done for
the day.
This cycle would conƟnue through the enƟre book. Obviously, the “old
verses altogether” stage will soon swell to take the most Ɵme of all.
That’s exactly the way it should be. The enƟre book of Ephesians can be
read at a reasonable rate in less than fiŌeen minutes. Therefore, the “old
verses altogether” stage of your review should not take longer than that
on any given day. Do it with the Bible ready at hand, in case you draw a
blank or get stuck… there’s no shame in looking, and it actually helps to nail
down troublesome verses so they will never be trouble again. Therefore,
your 60th day should look like this:
60) Day sixty: (eight days off in that span means you’re on your 52nd
new verse, which would be Ephesians 3:7) Yesterday’s verse first. Recite yesterday’s verse, Ephesians 3:6 ten Ɵmes, being sure to include
the verse number. Again, you should look in the Bible if you need to,
just to refresh your memory. Old verses next, altogether: Recite Ephesians 1:1-3:6 together once, being sure to include the verse numbers.
Look in the Bible if you need to, so this process won’t take too long.
Now, do your new verse. Read Ephesians 3:7 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes.
You’re done for the day.
WEEDING THE GARDEN

As you recite a book over a long period of Ɵme without looking at the Bible, you will gradually begin to make liƩle mistakes or leave verses out
(again, this is why memorizing verse numbers is so helpful). In other
words, “weeds” will start to grow in the garden of your mind. However, to
“weed the garden,” once a week, read through the book, looking at each
verse carefully with your eyes. This will be in lieu of your “old verses next,
altogether” daily task. This simple discipline will correct errors—this will
“weed the garden.” 
LONG-TERM RETENTION
AND/OR MOVING ON TO OTHER BOOKS
Assuming you con
Ɵnue this procedure in Ephesians with no missed days (other
than your one day o
ff per week), you should be done with the whole book in 26
weeks. When you have learned Ephesians 6:24, “Six twenty‐four. Grace to all
who love our Lord Jesus Christ with an undying love.” You should stop to celebrate…get on your knees and give thanks to God for His goodness to you!
But a
Ōer your celebra
Ɵon is done, you need to get back to work. If you have
done the “old verses altogether” stage faithfully, this next stage should not be
overly burdensome, even though it may seem like it will: recite the en
Ɵre book
from memory for one hundred consecu
Ɵve days. If you have done your work
well, a
Ōer about the second week you probably won’t even need the Bible anywhere near you while you do this. Thus, you can do this step while in the
shower, while driving, while washing dishes, while walking down the road,
while exercising… it will add no extra
Ɵme to your busy schedule. What is
more, it is in this stage that you begin to see the scope of the en
Ɵre book of
Ephesians (or whatever book you have memorized). You will see large themes
that unite chapters together, you will see the flow of the argument, you will
discover new things that you never knew before.
Be tough with yourself… one hundred days without missing a single one! You
can do it, and you’ll be glad you did.
When that is over, you have two op
Ɵons: either you can seek to retain Ephesians indefinitely as you add other books, or you can “kiss the book goodbye”
and devote your a
Ʃen
Ɵon to acquiring new books. While there are advantages
to trying to retain old books indefinitely, at some point most people will reach
a satura
Ɵon level and no longer be able to learn new books while holding on to
all the books they’ve learned in the past. It’s a rare person who can hold onto
limitless old verses while con
Ɵnually adding new ones. Everyone will come to
an end of what they can hold on the “desktop” of their minds—verses readily
accessible, ready for quota
Ɵon. Now, just because you “kiss the book goodbye” doesn’t mean you will forget it en
Ɵrely. The meaning of Ephesians will
sƟck with you, and so will your specific knowledge of all its teachings. You will
immediately remember what you know so well as soon as you look at the page,
and you will never forget the flow of thought, or even specific insights you’ve
learned. You will forever be able to read the paragraphs with deep insight and
sensi
Ɵvity, and you will know what you’re looking for when you flip there to
confirm a cross-reference. The Holy Spirit will be able to bring back to mind
whatever verses He wants to use to convict you of sin or strengthen your heart
or for witnessing. It’s all s
Ɵll there—it’s just subterranean now! If you should 
ever choose to return and get it uploaded again, it will be far easier than if
you’d never memorized it before.
The reason you would “kiss the book goodbye” is to free you up to learn new
books without requiring a major change in your lifestyle—entering a Scripture
MemorizaƟon monastery or cult in which all you do with your life is memorize! If you find that your intake of new books is hampered by seeking to retain old books, then… “Kiss the book goodbye!” Why? For the sake of all the
new insights you will gain by learning a new book of the Bible. Not many people will complete memorizing the whole Bible. There will always be more
memorizaƟon work you can do. So keep learning new books. If on the other
hand you do not go on to memorize a new book, then don’t “kiss the book
goodbye.” I’d rather have you doing some memorizaƟon than no memorizaƟon.
Now if you are one of those rare people who can possibly retain seemingly
limitless old books such that you are in no way hindered in memorizing new
books by retaining old books, then try this approach: sƟck the book in a slot
(Monday morning, let’s say), and recite on Monday morning for the rest of
your life. You will never forget it. However, don’t forget to “weed the garden”.
MEMORIZING LONG BOOKS
& MEMORIZING FASTER
AŌer you’ve taken six months with Ephesians at the rate of one verse per day,
you may feel that you’re ready to memorize a longer book. If, for example,
you memorized Romans, you would be looking at 432 verses. At the rate of
one verse per day, that’s close to a year and a half (with a 10% fudge factor in
there). That may be too long for you… you’re ready to pick up the pace. When
I memorized the Gospel of MaƩhew, I did it at the rate of 36 verses per week…
six per day, six days per week. It took me about 9 months, since I didn’t maintain that pace the whole Ɵme… but MaƩhew is 1068 verses long… a verse a
day would have been much too slow. Let’s look at how to do mulƟple verses
in a single day:
1) Day one: Read MaƩhew 1:1 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word
as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. Repeat for verses 2
through 6, being sure to include the verse numbers. Then, recite the
whole six verse secƟon, MaƩhew 1:1-6, ten Ɵmes. You’re done for the
day. 
2) Day two: Yesterday’s verses first. Recite yesterday’s verses,
MaƩhew 1:1-6, ten Ɵmes, being sure to include the verse numbers. Look
in the Bible if you need to, just to refresh your memory. Now, do your
new verses. Read MaƩhew 1:7 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word
as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse number. Then cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. Repeat for MaƩhew
1:8-12. Then, recite the whole new six verse secƟon, MaƩhew 1:7-12, ten
Ɵmes. You’re done for the day.
3) Day three: Yesterday’s verses first. Recite yesterday’s verses,
MaƩhew 1:7-12, ten Ɵmes, being sure to include the verse number.
Again, you should look in the Bible if you need to, just to refresh your
memory. Old verses next, altogether: Recite MaƩhew 1:1-12 together
once, being sure to include the verse numbers. Now, do your new verses.
Read MaƩhew 1:13 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse number. Then
cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. Repeat for MaƩhew 1:14-18.
Then, recite the whole new six verse secƟon, MaƩhew 1:13-18, ten Ɵmes.
You’re done for the day.
4) Day four: Yesterday’s verses first. Recite yesterday’s verses, MaƩhew
1:13-18, ten Ɵmes, being sure to include the verse number. Again, you
should look in the Bible if you need to, just to refresh your memory. Old
verses next, altogether: Recite MaƩhew 1:1-18 together once, being
sure to include the verse numbers. Now, do your new verses. Read
MaƩhew 1:19 out loud ten Ɵmes, looking at each word as if photographing it with your eyes. Be sure to include the verse number. Then
cover the page and recite it ten Ɵmes. Repeat for MaƩhew 1:20-24.
Then, recite the whole new six verse secƟon, MaƩhew 1:19-24, ten Ɵmes.
You’re done for the day.
The ongoing review (the “old verses altogether” stage) will get unwieldy once
you’re at chapter 7 or 8. At that point, start leaving off chapter 1, then chapter 2, then chapter 3 etc. as you conƟnue to move through the book. Limit
the amount of Ɵme you spend on the “old verses altogether” stage to fiŌeen
or twenty minutes. Review the chapters you leave off (chapter 1, then 2, then
3) once per week. By the Ɵme you get to MaƩhew 28:20, you will have to
divide your long-term review into reasonable porƟons. This is the “High
School Method” of long-term review:
The High School Method of Long‐Term Review (using The Gospel of MaƩhew
as an example):
1) Read MaƩhew with a stop watch, and Ɵme out ten minutes of verses,
reading at a normal rate. This may be MaƩhew 1-5, depending on your 
normal reading rate. Let’s take that as an example. (I average about 125
verses for 10 minutes). NOTE: Stop at major chapter divisions… don’t do
Ma
Ʃhew 1:1 thru 5:37 for example. Dig deep and get to the end of the
nearest chapter, even if it’s 11 minutes of reading for you.
2) Recite Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 every day for 25 days. A
Ōer about 15 days, you
should be able to do it without the Bible, if you did your work well the
first
Ɵme you memorized these verses. Then just do it in the shower or
while driving, etc. This shouldn’t add anything extra to your day.
3) On the 26th day, add the next “ten minutes” of Ma
Ʃhew. Let’s say this
is Ma
Ʃhew 6-8. Recite Ma
Ʃhew 6-8 every day for 25 days, while con
Ɵnuing Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 for this
Ɵme. At the end of this period, you will have
done Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 for 50 straight days, and Ma
Ʃhew 6-8 for 25 straight
days.
4) On the 51st day, add the next “ten minutes” (i.e. 125 verses or so) of
Ma
Ʃhew. Let’s say this is Ma
Ʃhew 9-12. Do these chapters for 25 days,
while con
Ɵnuing Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 and 6-8. At the end of this period, you will
have done Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 for 75 days, Ma
Ʃhew 6-8 for 50 days, and
Ma
Ʃhew 9-12 for 25 days.
5) On the 76th day, add the next sec
Ɵon… perhaps Ma
Ʃhew 13-15. Do
these chapters for 25 days, while con
Ɵnuing Ma
Ʃhew 1-5, 6-8, and 9-12.
At the end of this period, you will have done Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 for 100 days,
Ma
Ʃhew 6-8 for 75 days, and Ma
Ʃhew 9-12 for 50 days, and Ma
Ʃhew 13
-15 for 25 days. As in a high school, Ma
Ʃhew 1-5 is your “senior class”,
Ma
Ʃhew 6-8 your “junior class,” Ma
Ʃhew 9-12 your “sophomore class,”
and Ma
Ʃhew 13-15 your “freshman class.” The en
Ɵre reci
Ɵng process
should take no more than 45 minutes, if you’ve done your
Ɵming right.
ALSO NOTE… by this
Ɵme, you should be able to recite Ma
Ʃhew 1-12 at
least with no Bible at all… thus, it can be done while you do other things…
thus, you will be si
ƫng and doing nothing but memoriza
Ɵon for no more
than 15-20 minutes at most.
6) On the 101st day, you can “graduate” Ma
Ʃhew 1-5, and either “kiss it
goodbye” or s
Ɵck it into a “Monday slot” to do it for the rest of your life.
You have done it so many
Ɵmes at this point, you could recite it in your
sleep. (Perhaps you do!) Simply recite it every Monday, in addi
Ɵon to
the ongoing work you’re doing… or, of that’s too much, just review it
once a month to keep it fresh.
Now, add the next “ten minutes” of Ma
Ʃhew, to replace the “senior
class” that just graduated… perhaps its Ma
Ʃhew 16-19. Keep on going
with Ma
Ʃhew 6-8 (your new “senior class”), Ma
Ʃhew 9-12 (“junior
class”), and Ma
Ʃhew 13-15 (“sophomore class”). At the end of this next 
period, you will have done MaƩhew 6-8 for 100 days, MaƩhew 9-12 for
75 days, MaƩhew 13-15 for 50 days, and MaƩhew 16-19 for 25 days.
7) On the 126th day, “graduate” MaƩhew 6-8, and either “kiss it goodbye” or sƟck it into a “Tuesday slot” to do it for the rest of your life. Add
MaƩhew 20-22, and conƟnue. At the end of this next period, you will
have done MaƩhew 9-12 for 100 days, MaƩhew 13-15 for 75 days,
MaƩhew 16-19 for 50 days, and MaƩhew 20-22 for 25 days.
8) On the 151st day, “graduate” MaƩhew 9-12, and either “kiss it goodbye” or sƟck it into a “Wednesday slot” to do it for the rest of your life.
Add MaƩhew 23-25, and conƟnue. At the end of this next period, you will
have done MaƩhew 13-15 for 100 days, MaƩhew 16-19 for 75 days,
MaƩhew 20-22 for 50 days, and MaƩhew 23-25 for 25 days.
9) On the 176th day, “graduate” MaƩhew 13-15, and either “kiss it goodbye” or sƟck it into a “Thursday slot” to do it for the rest of your life. Add
MaƩhew 26-27, and conƟnue. At the end of this next period, you will
have done MaƩhew 16-19 for 100 days, MaƩhew 20-22 for 75 days,
MaƩhew 23-25 for 50 days, and MaƩhew 26-27 for 25 days.
10) On the 201st day, you can “graduate” MaƩhew 16-19, and either
“kiss it goodbye” or sƟck it into a “Friday slot” to do it for the rest of your
life. Now you can finally add MaƩhew 28 to your review cycle. ConƟnue
on, but add no new verses. Go unƟl you have finished your 100 days on
MaƩhew 28 (the 300th day). AŌer about 25 days of doing MaƩhew 28,
you should be able to recite the enƟre Gospel of MaƩhew at a good rate
of accuracy, totally from memory. At that point, you can fall on your
knees and give thanks to God for His goodness to you. But keep doing
your work unƟl you’ve finished your 100 days for all verses.
11) Review each secƟon one a week or once a month as you feel the
need, in order to keep it fresh, or “kiss it all goodbye” and memorize the
Gospel of John (or the Book of Daniel… whatever excites your heart!)
It is my prayer that God will raise up a generaƟon of people who do this labor,
thus presenƟng themselves to God as those approved, workers who do not
need to be ashamed, and who correctly handle the Word of Truth. (cf. 2 Timothy 2:15) The lost people in our naƟon and the weak and immature churches
which have so proliferated are in deep need of the meat of the Word and
those qualified to give it to them. May God bless your diligence and hard
work! 
Weeks  New Verses  Old Verses 
Week 1 Ephesians 1:1‐1:6
Week 2 Ephesians 1:7‐1:12 Ephesians 1:1‐1:6
Week 3 Ephesians 1:13‐1:18 Ephesians 1:1‐1:12
Week 4 Ephesians 1:19‐2:1 Ephesians 1:1‐1:18
Week 5 Ephesians 2:2‐2:7 Ephesians 1:1‐2:1
Week 6 Ephesians 2:8‐2:13 Ephesians 1:1‐2:7
Week 7 Ephesians 2:14‐2:19 Ephesians 1:1‐2:13
Week 8 Ephesians 2:20‐3:3 Ephesians 1:1‐2:19
Week 9 Ephesians 3:4‐3:9 Ephesians 1:1‐3:3
Week 10 Ephesians 3:10‐3:15 Ephesians 1:1‐3:9
Week 11 Ephesians 3:16‐3:21 Ephesians 1:1‐3:15
Week 12 Ephesians 4:1‐4:6 Ephesians 1:1‐3:21
Week 13 Ephesians 4:7‐4:12 Ephesians 1:1‐4:6
Week 14 Ephesians 4:13‐4:18 Ephesians 1:1‐4:12
Week 15 Ephesians 4:19‐4:24 Ephesians 1:1‐4:18
Week 16 Ephesians 4:25‐4:30 Ephesians 1:1‐4:24
Week 17 Ephesians 4:31‐5:4 Ephesians 1:1‐4:30
Week 18 Ephesians 5:5‐5:10 Ephesians 1:1‐5:4
Week 19 Ephesians 5:11‐5:16 Ephesians 1:1‐5:10
Week 20 Ephesians 5:17‐5:22 Ephesians 1:1‐5:16
Week 21 Ephesians 5:23‐5:28 Ephesians 1:1‐5:22
Week 22 Ephesians 5:29‐6:1 Ephesians 1:1‐5:28
Week 23 Ephesians 6:2‐6:7 Ephesians 1:1‐6:1
Week 24 Ephesians 6:8‐6:13 Ephesians 1:1‐6:7
Week 25 Ephesians 6:14‐6:19 Ephesians 1:1‐6:13
Week 26 Ephesians 6:20‐6:24 Ephesians 1:1‐6:19
Appendix 1 
Ephesians Weekly Schedule 
WEEK 1 
Ephesians 1:1‐6 
Yesterday’s Verse  Old Verses  
Together 
New Verse 
Day 1  Ephesians 1:1
Day 2  Ephesians 1:1 Ephesians 1:1 Ephesians 1:2
Day 3  Ephesians 1:2 Ephesians 1:1‐2 Ephesians 1:3
Day 4  Ephesians 1:3 Ephesians 1:1‐3 Ephesians 1:4
Day 5  Ephesians 1:4 Ephesians 1:1‐4 Ephesians 1:5
Day 6  Ephesians 1:5 Ephesians 1:1‐5 Ephesians 1:6
Appendix 2 
Sample Weekly Schedule
WEEK 24 
Ephesians 6:8‐13  
Yesterday’s Verse  Old Verses  
Together 
New Verse 
Day 1  Ephesians 6:7 Ephesians 1:1‐6:7 Ephesians 6:8
Day 2  Ephesians 6:8 Ephesians 1:1‐6:8 Ephesians 6:9
Day 3  Ephesians 6:9 Ephesians 1:1‐6:9 Ephesians 6:10
Day 4  Ephesians 6:10 Ephesians 1:1‐6:10 Ephesians 6:11
Day 5  Ephesians 6:11 Ephesians 1:1‐6:11 Ephesians 6:12
Day 6  Ephesians 6:12 Ephesians 1:1‐6:12 Ephesians 6:13
. . . 
Old Testament   Number of 
Books  Verses 
Genesis 1533
Exodus 1213
LeviƟcus 859
Numbers 1288
Deuteronomy 959
Joshua 658
Judges 618
Ruth 85
1 Samuel 810
2 Samuel 695
1 Kings 816
2 Kings 719
1 Chronicles 942
2 Chronicles 822
Ezra 280
Nehemiah 406
Esther 467
Job 1070
Psalm 2461
Proverbs 915
Ecclesiastes 222
Song of Solomon 117
Isaiah 1292
Jeremiah 1364
LamentaƟons 154
Ezekiel 1273
Daniel 357
Hosea 197
Joel 73
Amos 146
Obadiah 21
Jonah 48
Micah 105
Nahum 47
Habakkuk 56
Zephaniah 53
Haggai 38
Zechariah 211
Malachi 55
Appendix 3 
Verses per book
New Testament   Number of 
Books   Verses 
MaƩhew 1071
Mark 678
Luke 1151
John 879
Acts 1007
Romans 433
1 Corinthians 437
2 Corinthians 257
GalaƟans 149
Ephesians 155
Philippians 104
Colossians 95
1 Thessalonians 89
2 Thessalonians 47
1 Timothy 113
2 Timothy 83
Titus 46
Philemon 25
Hebrews 303
James 108
1 Peter 105
2 Peter 61
1 John 105
2 John 13
3 John 14
Jude 25
RevelaƟon 404
Andy was born in Boston, MassachuseƩs where he later earned his bachelor's
degree in Mechanical Engineering from MIT
in 1984. He then began his career as a Mechanical Engineer with Eaton-Nova CorporaƟon in Beverly, MassachuseƩs. He and his
wife ChrisƟ married on May 14, 1988, and
they have two sons (Nathaniel & Calvin) and
three daughters (Jenny, Carolyn, & Daphne).
Andy started his seminary training while working as an
engineer and earned his Masters of Divinity from GordonConwell Theological Seminary in 1990. In 1992, Andy resigned
from his engineering posiƟon to pastor the New Meadows
BapƟst Church in Topsfield, MassachuseƩs. The Davis family
followed the call of the Lord to Tokushima, Japan, where they
were involved in church planƟng through the InternaƟonal
Mission Board from 1993-1995. Andy graduated from the
Southern BapƟst Theological Seminary in Louisville, KY, with a
Ph.D. in Church History in 1998. In October of 1998, Andy accepted a call to be the senior pastor of First BapƟst Church in
Durham, NC. He has also served Southeastern BapƟst Theological Seminary in Wake Forest, NC as VisiƟng Professor of
Historical Theology from 2005 unƟl the present.
Andy is the author of various arƟcles, book chapters,
and books, and recently published An Infinite Journey, publisher Ambassador InternaƟonal, 2014.
The passion of Andy’s life is using the perfect Word of
God to minister to people and advance the Kingdom of Jesus
Christ in Durham and to the ends of the earth. 
414 Cleveland Street
Durham, NC 27701
919.688.7308
www.fbcdurham.org 